Title: NebulaSD: Many-for-Many Speculative Decoding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.29364v1

Published Time: Fri, 25 Sep 2026 01:11:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
Network Intelligence and Computing Ecosystem Lab N i CE 

Network Intelligence and Computing Ecosystem Lab nice NEBULA SD: MANY -FOR -M ANY SPECULATIVE DE-

# CODING 

Junhao He 1, Hongyang Du 1∗

> 1

The University of Hong Kong 

## ABSTRACT 

Speculative decoding accelerates Large Language Model (LLM) inference by us-ing a lightweight draft model to propose candidate tokens for parallel verification by a target model. Drafting and verification, however, exhibit different service characteristics and favor different batch configurations, making fixed draft-target coupling inefficient under concurrent workloads. Existing distributed designs can physically separate the two stages, but often retain request or batch affinities that prevent their capacities from being shared globally. We present NebulaSD, a many-for-many, or M-for-N, speculative decoding system that organizes draft and target workers into independently schedulable resource pools and dynami-cally reconstructs stage-specific batches from shared request pools. Such dynamic reassignment removes fixed worker locality, requiring request states to be made available at newly selected workers without introducing migration stalls. Nebu-laSD addresses this challenge through worker-triggered batch reconstruction and asynchronous KV-state preparation overlapped with model execution. We evalu-ate NebulaSD from both system and scaling perspectives, showing that dynamic pooling improves request-round processing rate by 50 .4% over a physically dis-aggregated baseline and 72 .6% over co-located execution on a four-GPU deploy-ment while substantially increasing effective GPU utilization. Profile-driven sim-ulations further show approximately proportional compute-side capacity scaling under idealized state movement. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Large Language Models (LLMs) power a wide range of interactive applications, but their autore-gressive decoding process incurs high generation latency and substantial serving costs (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023). Speculative decoding accelerates generation by using a lightweight draft model to propose multiple candidate tokens and verifying them in parallel with the target model, allowing multiple tokens to be committed within a single target-model forward pass (Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Existing studies have substantially improved speculative decoding through more accurate candi-date generation, efficient verification, and adaptive speculation strategies (Miao et al., 2024a; Cai et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). Recent systems further coordinate speculative execution with dynamic workloads, hardware conditions, and service-level objectives (Liu et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026b). Despite these advances, many speculative decoding systems still organize draft-ing and verification around fixed request or batch associations between the two stages (Tang et al., 2026). Such coupling can become inefficient when drafting and verification exhibit different ser-vice characteristics, because the processing capacity available at one stage cannot be independently matched to the workload of the other. This difference in service characteristics is evident in how the two stages scale with batch size and utilize GPU resources. Although the draft model is typically much smaller than the target model (Leviathan et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), drafting and verification follow different execution patterns and scale differently with batch size. As shown in Fig. 1a, the forward latency of Qwen3-8B (Yang et al., 2025) increases sharply when the batch size reaches 512, whereas the latency of Qwen3-1.7B (Yang et al., 2025) remains nearly unchanged. Fig. 1c further shows that the two 

> ∗

Corresponding author. arXiv:2609.29364v1 [cs.NI] 24 Sep 2026 Preprint models exhibit different GPU resource demands as the batch size increases. These observations indicate that drafting and verification generally favor different batch configurations and therefore need not provide matched service capacities under the same resource allocation. Under fixed one-to-one pairing, such service-capacity mismatch remains local to each pair. Excess capacity at one stage cannot be shared with requests whose paired counterpart has become the bottleneck, and the effective service rate of each pair is therefore limited by its locally slower stage. As a result, available capacity can remain idle even when other pairs in the system are overloaded. A natural step toward alleviating this structural inefficiency is to physically separate drafting and verification resources, allowing the two stages to be provisioned according to their different ser-vice capacities. Recent distributed speculative decoding systems have explored such separation for heterogeneous accelerator utilization, edge-server collaboration, and shared or centralized verifica-tion (Shi et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026a). Physical disaggregation, however, does not provide global capacity sharing across both stages by itself. Existing designs primarily focus on deployment heterogeneity, remote drafting, verification-side batching, or adap-tive speculation instead of exposing both draft and target workers as globally schedulable resource pools in which requests can be reassigned and batches can be reconstructed independently at each stage. Fully exploiting independently provisioned resources therefore requires a stronger serving ab-straction that removes fixed worker and cross-stage batch affinities, allowing requests and execution capacity to be shared dynamically within each stage according to workload and resource availability. However, such dynamic request sharing requires requests to be reassigned across workers, which in turn breaks the state locality provided by fixed worker assignment. During auto-regressive gen-eration, each request carries model state in the form of a growing KV cache (Kwon et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024). Once requests can be reassigned across draft or target workers, the corresponding state must also be made available at the selected destination before execution can proceed. Per-forming state movement only after worker assignment places migration directly on the execution critical path, whereas preparing it too late can leave otherwise available workers idle. At the same time, aggressively moving state in advance may introduce unnecessary transfers and interfere with foreground computation. Efficient M-for-N execution therefore requires worker assignment, batch formation, and state preparation to be coordinated so that the required state becomes available when execution is ready without turning state migration into a new system bottleneck. To address these coupled requirements, we present NebulaSD, an M-for-N speculative decoding system that organizes M draft workers and N target workers as two independently provisioned and globally schedulable resource pools. Instead of permanently binding requests to individual draft-target pairs or preserving cross-stage batch affinity, NebulaSD dynamically reconstructs worker-local batches from shared request pools, allowing draft and target capacity to be independently matched to their workloads. To support such dynamic reassignment, NebulaSD coordinates worker-triggered batch reconstruction with advance state preparation, overlapping KV-state movement with foreground model execution whenever possible. Together, these mechanisms enable flexible re-source sharing across both worker pools while keeping most state-movement overhead off the exe-cution critical path. Our contributions are summarized below. • We propose an M-for-N speculative decoding architecture that decouples draft and target workers into independently schedulable resource pools, removing fixed request-worker and cross-stage batch affinities and enabling capacity sharing across the two stages. • We develop a worker-triggered stage-wise batch reconstruction policy that reconstructs each worker’s upcoming batch from a shared request pool according to execution readi-ness, state availability, and service efficiency, enabling fine-grained dynamic assignment without global repartitioning. • We design an asynchronous KV-state preparation mechanism that overlaps state movement with model computation through advance prefetching, incremental writeback, and double buffering, reducing the runtime overhead introduced by dynamic request reassignment. 

## 2 RELATED WORK 

Distributed speculative decoding. Speculative decoding accelerates autoregressive generation by using a lightweight draft model to propose candidate tokens and a target model to verify them in 2Preprint 1 8 32 64 128 256 512 

> Batch size
> 010 20 30 40
> Latency (ms)
> Qwen3-1.7B Qwen3-8B

(a) 64 256 512 1024 2048  

> Context length
> 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
> Written data (GiB)
> 0714 16 18 20 22 24
> Read data (GiB)
> Write, batch size = 1 Write, batch size = 8 Write, batch size = 32 Read, batch size = 1 Read, batch size = 8 Read, batch size = 32

(b) 16 32 64 128 256  

> Batch size
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Kernel2 Tensor (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> DRAM utilization (%) Qwen3-1.7B Qwen3-8B

(c) 

Figure 1: Forward-pass performance and GPU-memory traffic analysis. (a) Forward latency com-parison between Qwen3-1.7B and Qwen3-8B under different batch sizes. (b) GPU-memory read and write traffic of Qwen3-8B under various context lengths and batch sizes. (c) Kernel2 DRAM% and Tensor% that demonstrates memory-bandwidth pressure and tensor core saturation of the dom-inant compute kernel. parallel (Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Recent work has begun to separate draft genera-tion and target verification across devices or serving instances. Disaggregated speculative decoding places draft and target models on heterogeneous GPUs for improved hardware reuse and carbon efficiency (Shi et al., 2025). SLED and WISP study edge-side drafting with shared server-side verification, including cross-request batching and SLO-aware scheduling (Li et al., 2025; 2026a). DSD considers edge-cloud execution under network and batching effects with adaptive speculation control (Yu et al., 2025), while SPECTRE exploits underutilized remote model services as drafters in multi-model cloud serving (Xie et al., 2026). These systems primarily target heterogeneous de-ployment, edge-cloud collaboration, verification scheduling, or remote drafting, rather than globally pooling and independently scheduling both draft and target resources. 

LLM serving. LLM serving systems improve inference efficiency through batching, memory management, scheduling, and SLO-aware resource allocation. Orca introduces iteration-level scheduling for generative inference (Yu et al., 2022), while vLLM improves KV-cache manage-ment with PagedAttention to reduce memory fragmentation and support larger batches (Kwon et al., 2023). Sarathi-Serve further improves the throughput-latency trade-off through chunked prefill and stall-free scheduling (Agrawal et al., 2024). More recent systems explicitly consider latency ob-jectives and workload heterogeneity: DistServe disaggregates prefill and decode under TTFT and TPOT constraints (Zhong et al., 2024), Llumnix dynamically reschedules requests across model instances (Sun et al., 2024), and JITServe studies SLO-aware scheduling with imprecise request information (Zhang et al., 2026). These systems improve resource utilization and request schedul-ing in general LLM serving, but do not directly address the asymmetric service characteristics and alternating execution dependencies between drafting and verification in speculative decoding. 

KV cache migration. KV cache movement is a key challenge for dynamic LLM serving because each active request carries state that grows with sequence length. Llumnix supports live migration of active requests across model instances (Sun et al., 2024), while SpotServe introduces state migra-tion and recovery for preemptible GPU serving (Miao et al., 2024b). Prefill-decode disaggregated systems such as Splitwise and DistServe transfer request states across stages, making performance sensitive to communication bandwidth and placement decisions (Patel et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024). Other systems reduce KV-transfer or restoration overhead through compression and stream-ing (Liu et al., 2024), distributed KV-cache storage (Qin et al., 2025), or selective recomputation with cached-KV loading (Yao et al., 2025). These mechanisms reduce state-movement cost, but do not directly coordinate frequent cross-worker state preparation with stage-specific batch reconstruc-tion in speculative execution. 

## 3 PRELIMINARY 

GPU-Memory characteristics of LLM inference. LLM decoding at small-to-moderate batch sizes often exhibits low arithmetic intensity and is sensitive to GPU-memory bandwidth (Agrawal et al., 2024). During each target forward, model weights and the KV states associated with the existing context are repeatedly accessed, while new KV entries are generated only for the tokens processed in the current iteration. As shown in Fig. 1b, GPU-memory traffic is highly asymmetric. 3Preprint Target Workers 

> ⇄ Target Model
> Forward Bank
> Prefetch Bank
> Host Memory
> Request 1 Metadata KV Blocks
> …
> Request 2 Metadata KV Blocks
> …
> Scheduler Users
> Prompts KV Cache Ready Import KV Cache of Request to Worker Draft Tokens Batch Committed Tokens Verification Started Requests Batch Signal Data PCIe Channel Draft Tokens Batch Drafting Started Output Profiling Table of draft and target workers
> Calculate available time of draft and target worker after receive “Started” signal
> Reconstruct batch for triggered draft or target worker
> Verification Finished Drafting Finished
> ⇄Draft Model Forward Bank
> Prefetch Bank
> Draft Workers
> …
> Writeback Prefetch Writeback Prefetch
> …
> …

Figure 2: Architecture of NebulaSD. Draft and target workers form independent resource pools, while a centralized scheduler reconstructs worker-local batches from shared request pools and uses the host-side KV store to support cross-worker state preparation. The amount of data read is substantially larger than the amount written across all evaluated context lengths and batch sizes. 

KV cache organization. Modern LLM serving systems commonly use paged KV-cache manage-ment to reduce memory fragmentation and support dynamic batching (Kwon et al., 2023). However, a request’s KV state may span multiple non-contiguous blocks, making migration require block-map traversal, destination allocation, metadata reconstruction, and fragmented copies. KV cache is also append-dominant: across consecutive decoding or verification iterations, most prefix states remain unchanged while only newly generated states are appended. These properties make KV-cache move-ment more complex than transferring a single contiguous tensor. 

## 4 SYSTEM MODEL 

We first characterize the stage-level service capacity enabled by pooled execution, then describe how NebulaSD plans future execution and reconstructs worker-local batches under request and state readiness constraints. As illustrated in Fig. 2, NebulaSD consists of a shared draft-worker pool 

D = {d1, . . . , d M }, a shared target-worker pool T = {t1, . . . , t N }, a centralized scheduler, and a host-side KV store. We use s ∈ { D, T} to denote an execution stage and Ws to denote its corresponding worker pool, where WD = D and WT = T .Each request r maintains two logical execution states, Sr 

> D

and Sr

> T

, corresponding to the draft and target models, respectively. Requests are not permanently bound to individual workers. Instead, each stage maintains a shared request pool, from which different workers may serve a request across successive speculative iterations. The required model state is prepared through the host-side KV store before execution, allowing request execution to move across workers without preserving fixed worker affinity. NebulaSD also removes cross-stage batch affinity. Requests processed together in one stage are not required to remain together in the next stage; workers instead reconstruct their upcoming batches independently from the corresponding stage-level pool. This worker-local reconstruction decouples batch formation across stages while preserving global request sharing within each worker pool. The scheduling policy for constructing such batches is defined below. 

Stage progression and pool capacity. Each request alternates between the draft and target stages across speculative iterations. For request r in iteration q, the execution dependency is 

draft qr ≺ target qr ≺ draft q+1  

> r

, (1) where ≺ denotes an execution dependency. The output of the predecessor stage must be available before the next-stage computation can begin, although the corresponding worker assignment and KV-state preparation may be planned earlier. Let bTs(B) = ϕs(zB) denote the profiled execution time of batch B at stage s, where zB summarizes the workload characteristics relevant to execution, 4Preprint Host memory Target worker Verify batch 1 Prefetch KV for batch 2   

> ……
> HBM
> Writeback batch 1 Verify batch 2 Verify batch 3 Prefetch KV for batch 3 Prefetch KV for batch 4 Writeback batch 2 Writeback batch 3 H2D D2H H2D D2H H2D
> KV Cache transmission
> Pipeline Overlap Batch reconstruction Scheduler
> Batch reconstruction …

Figure 3: Pipeline of a target worker in NebulaSD. such as batch size, context length, and proposal depth. The corresponding stage service rate is approximately 

μs(B) = |B| 

bTs(B) . (2) Thus, the aggregate service capacity of a worker pool depends on both its number of workers and the batch configurations that those workers can efficiently execute. Since every speculative iteration requires both draft and target execution, the steady-state processing rate is ultimately limited by the slower stage, 

μsys ≤ min {μD, μ T}. (3) This motivates independently provisioning and scheduling the two pools according to their different service capacities instead of preserving fixed draft-target pairs. 

Overlapped batch planning and state preparation. Given the stage dependency in Eq. 1, Neb-ulaSD applies the same scheduling and preparation abstraction to both draft and target execution. In particular, either a draft or target worker can independently trigger planning for its next batch, select requests from the corresponding shared request pool, and initiate state preparation before the predecessor stage completes. Fig. 3 illustrates this symmetric pipeline from the perspective of a tar-get worker. Although the next-stage computation cannot begin until its predecessor output becomes available, NebulaSD does not require worker assignment and state preparation to wait for that com-pletion. When a worker obtains an opportunity to prepare its next batch, the scheduler may use predicted predecessor completion times to select requests and prepare the required state in advance. Consequently, target computation can overlap with draft-state preparation, while draft computation can overlap with target-state preparation. The steady-state execution therefore alternates between  

> TARGET q

, DRAFT q+1 , and TARGET q+1 , while the state preparation for each upcoming stage is overlapped with the computation of its predecessor. A prepared batch is launched only when its predecessor output, required KV state, and destination worker are all actually ready. Predicted com-pletion times are therefore used for advance planning and preparation, whereas runtime readiness events determine when execution can safely begin. 

Worker-triggered batch reconstruction. Consider a scheduling opportunity for worker w ∈ W s

at stage s ∈ { D, T}, and let ¯s denote its predecessor stage, i.e., ¯s = T for s = D and ¯s = D 

for s = T . Since the destination worker is fixed by the scheduling opportunity, the scheduler reconstructs its next batch from the eligible requests E ⊆ R s. NebulaSD may plan this batch before all predecessor computations finish and therefore distinguishes observed completion times from predicted ones. If the predecessor of request r has completed, its observed completion time er

is used directly. Otherwise, for a predecessor batch that started at tstart with workload descriptor z,the scheduler predicts 

ber = tstart + ϕ¯s(z), (4) using the profiling table of the predecessor stage. Let eer denote the predecessor completion time available to the scheduler, using er when observed and ber otherwise. The predicted availability 

baw of the destination worker is analogously obtained from the start time and profiled duration of its currently executing stage-s batch. For state readiness, let bkr (w) denote the predicted time at which the KV state required by request r becomes available on worker w, based on its current state location and the estimated preparation or migration cost. The state-ready time of a candidate batch is therefore bk(B, w ) = max 

> r∈B

bkr (w). (5) 5Preprint 

Algorithm 1 Worker-triggered batch reconstruction                             

> Require: Stage s, triggered worker w, request pool Rs
> 1: Filter eligible requests and predict request/worker readiness 2: Rank candidates by predecessor readiness, waiting time, and temporal compatibility 3: F ← first at most Bmax candidates in the ranked order; B ← ∅
> 4: for all r∈ F in the ranked order do
> 5: if B ∪ { r}satisfies Eq. 8 then
> 6: B ← B ∪ { r}
> 7: end if
> 8: end for
> 9: Freeze/reserve nonempty Band issue P REPARE (B, w )
> 10: R UN when I NPUT READY ∧KVR EADY ∧WORKER READY

The earliest predicted start time of B is 

bS(B, w ) = max 

baw, max  

> r∈B

eer , bk(B, w )



. (6) This formulation captures the three conditions that jointly determine future execution: worker avail-ability, predecessor-output readiness, and KV-state readiness. 

Service-constrained batch reconstruction. Batch reconstruction improves stage efficiency by aggregating requests into favorable batch configurations, but exhaustive subset optimization at ev-ery worker opportunity would introduce scheduling overhead on the serving critical path. Nebu-laSD therefore adopts a bounded online reconstruction policy that prioritizes timely service while preserving batching efficiency. Let Sr denote the start time of request r at its next stage and er

the completion time of its predecessor stage, giving the realized service interval Gr = Sr − er .For each stage s, NebulaSD specifies a configurable target service interval gs, which determines the nominal timescale at which requests should receive their next-stage service. At scheduling time, the predecessor completion time is represented by eer , while bS({r}, w ) denotes the predicted start time if r were served alone by the triggered worker w. We define the corresponding service-admission bound as 

bdr (w) = max 

neer + gs, bS({r}, w )

o

+ ∆ s, (7) where the configurable slack ∆s controls the additional delay permitted for batch formation. Areconstructed batch B is admissible on worker w only if 

|B| ≤ Bmax , Fit( B, w ) = 1 , bS(B, w ) ≤ min 

> r∈B

bdr (w). (8) The first two conditions enforce batch-size and physical-capacity constraints, while the last bounds batching-induced delay for every included request. NebulaSD then ranks eligible requests by ser-vice urgency and temporal compatibility and greedily constructs a batch subject to these constraints, avoiding the cost of exhaustive subset search in the online scheduling path. The waiting-time com-ponent of the ranking provides an aging effect for deferred requests, while the predicted singleton start time bS({r}, w ) provides a feasibility baseline, preventing unavoidable worker, predecessor, or state-readiness delays from being counted as batching-induced delay. 

## 5 IMPLEMENTATION 

Runtime architecture. NebulaSD implements target workers on top of SwiftLLM (Liu, 2024) and exposes a unified draft-worker interface that can accommodate different speculative-decoding backends. Both worker pools provide the same scheduler-facing abstractions for batch execution, KV-state migration, and asynchronous event reporting. A centralized scheduler maintains request, worker, and state-residency metadata, receives execution-start and completion signals from both pools, and triggers worker-local batch reconstruction and state preparation according to the schedul-ing opportunities described in Section 4. This design keeps scheduling independent of backend-specific execution while allowing both draft and target requests to migrate across workers between speculative iterations. 6Preprint 

Persistent HostKV. NebulaSD maintains host-resident KV states for both the draft and target models throughout the lifetime of each active request. The two model states are stored in separate stage-specific regions allocated from pre-registered pinned-memory arenas and identified by stable offsets. Each state is associated with lightweight metadata recording its valid sequence length, storage location, and version. The persistent layout avoids repeated host-buffer allocation, memory registration, and repacking during migration, while allowing the scheduler to prepare either draft-side or target-side state on any worker in the corresponding pool. 

Incremental KV writeback and migration estimation. NebulaSD updates HostKV incremen-tally by asynchronously writing back only the valid KV suffix that is not already persistent in host memory, while leaving the unchanged prefix intact. For a batch B at stage s ∈ { D, T}, let ∆Qs(B)

denote the number of KV tokens that must be written back to HostKV, and let Qs(B) denote the number of KV tokens that must be restored from HostKV during preparation. With stage-specific KV size bKV ,s and profiled effective transfer bandwidths, NebulaSD estimates the corresponding migration costs as 

bTs, wb (B) = ∆Qs(B)bKV ,s 

βs, D2H 

, bTs, in (B) = Qs(B)bKV ,s 

βs, H2D 

. (9) These estimates, together with HostKV readiness and transfer progress, are used to derive the request-level predicted KV-ready times bkr (w) and hence the batch-level readiness bk(B, w ) in Eq. 5. Incremental writeback reduces redundant GPU-memory reads and D2H traffic, while asynchronous transfer allows state synchronization to proceed independently of foreground execution. 

Overlapped state preparation. Each draft and target worker maintains two KV banks so that state preparation for a future batch can overlap with foreground model execution. While one bank serves the current computation, the other can complete state writeback and prepare the KV state re-quired by the next scheduled batch. The banks alternate roles across executions, allowing most state movement to proceed outside the foreground critical path. Detailed bank states, reuse dependencies, and physical-capacity constraints are described in Appendix E.2. 

## 6 EXPERIMENT 

We evaluate NebulaSD from both system and scaling perspectives. We first use a four-GPU de-ployment to examine whether physical disaggregation alone is sufficient and how dynamic pooling affects system processing capacity, hardware utilization, and per-request service under a fixed re-source budget. We then use large-scale profile-driven simulation to study how NebulaSD scales with larger worker pools and how resource provisioning and workload concurrency jointly determine the system’s operating point across different deployment scales. For the four-GPU study, experiments are conducted on four RTX 4090 GPUs using Qwen3-0.6B (Yang et al., 2025) as the draft model and Qwen3-8B (Yang et al., 2025) as the target model, with a speculative depth of 4. We initialize 512 requests with a maximum generation length of 128 tokens, let them arrive simultaneously, and fix the maximum target batch size to 32 across all configurations. Co-located places one draft instance ( D) and one target instance ( T) on each GPU and processes requests with the conventional coupled execution model. Native Distributed physi-cally separates the two stages into a 2D + 2T deployment with a draft batch-size limit of 128 , but preserves cross-stage batch affinity. NebulaSD uses the same 2D + 2T resource configuration and batch-size limits, while additionally enabling shared request pools, worker-triggered batch recon-struction, cross-worker state migration, and early state preparation. We report the request-round processing rate, defined as the number of completed speculative rounds per second, where each round consists of one draft stage followed by target verification. 6.1 FROM DISAGGREGATION TO DYNAMIC POOLING 

Fig. 4 shows that NebulaSD improves effective hardware utilization and system processing capacity beyond what is achieved by physical disaggregation alone. Compared with both Co-located and Na-tive Distributed execution, NebulaSD keeps the independently provisioned draft and target resources busy for a substantially larger fraction of time, increasing time-weighted SM activity from 30 .1% 

7Preprint Co-located Native Distributed NebulaSD Simulation NebulaSD 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500  

> Request processed / s
> 1,109 1,273 1,915 2,219

(a) Request-round rate Co-located Native Distributed NebulaSD Simulation NebulaSD 020 40 60   

> Estimated weighted SM Active (%)
> 9.0 21.1 30.1% 5.5 23.9 29.4% 9.6 37.7 47.3% 10.4 43.8 54.1%
> Draft Target

(b) Time-weighted SM activity Co-located Native Distributed NebulaSD Simulation NebulaSD 020 40 60 80 100   

> Mean per-request compute service (%)
> 73.8 24.1 97.9% 42.9 13.7 56.6% 33.4 10.6 44.0% 37.5 12.5 50.0%
> Draft Target

(c) Compute-service fraction 

Figure 4: Steady-state comparison of Co-located, Native Distributed, NebulaSD, and simulated Neb-ulaSD. (a) Request-round processing rate, measured in completed speculative rounds per second. (b) Estimated GPU utilization based on compute-time-weighted Streaming Multiprocessor (SM) activ-ity. (c) Mean fraction of time each request receives worker computation. and 29 .4% to 47 .3% , while increasing the request-round processing rate from 1109 .37 and 1273 .35 

rounds/s to 1914 .83 rounds/s, respectively. Table 1: Steady-state execution characteristics on four RTX 4090 GPUs.                                                 

> Metric Co-located Native Dist. NebulaSD Ideal Sim.
> System performance
> Request rounds (/s) 1109.37 1273.35 1914.83 2218.67
> Batching and model execution
> Draft avg. batch 32.00 128.00 89.24 96.00 Target avg. batch 32.00 32.00 31.32 32.00 Drafting time (ms) 86.37 87.21 87.72 86.38 Verification time (ms) 27.83 27.51 28.15 28.93
> Pipeline utilization
> Draft compute rate (%) 73.83 42.90 95.28 100.00 Target compute rate (%) 24.11 54.67 86.34 100.00 Draft mean gap (ms) 30.20 114.96 4.38 0.00 Target mean gap (ms) 89.17 24.03 4.45 0.00
> SM activity during computation
> Draft SM Active (%) 12.22 25.49 20.25 20.72 Target SM Active (%) 87.51 87.51 87.32 87.51

The definition of time-weighted SM activity is given in Appendix C. This improvement comes from dy-namically reconstructing batches and filling execution bubbles rather than simply increasing batch size. In fact, NebulaSD uses a smaller average draft batch than Native Distributed, while the target batch size and per-batch computation time remain similar across the two configurations. Instead, the mean gaps between consecutive compu-tations decrease from 114 .96 to 

4.38 ms for draft workers and from 

24 .03 to 4.45 ms for target workers, indicating that dynamic pooling primarily improves performance by keeping both worker pools con-tinuously supplied with executable work. The trade-off is also visible from the request perspective: under the same four-GPU bud-get, the mean compute-service fraction decreases from 97 .9% for Co-located and 56 .6% for Native Distributed to 44 .0% with NebulaSD, as each request receives a smaller fraction of GPU compute service while the system serves more requests concurrently. In larger deployments, however, this trade-off can be mitigated by scaling the worker pools and better matching the aggregate service ca-pacities of the draft and target stages, which will be further illustrated in the large-scale simulation experiments in Section 6.2. The idealized simulation further isolates the scheduling potential of NebulaSD from practical run-time effects. As shown in Table 1, the real system and simulation exhibit similar per-batch computa-tion costs, while their main difference lies in the idle gaps between consecutive worker computations. In NebulaSD, the execution of a prepared batch is jointly constrained by predecessor-output readi-ness, worker availability, and KV-state readiness, as modeled in Eq. 6. At each worker-triggered scheduling opportunity, the scheduler reconstructs the worker’s next batch using the service-aware ranking and admissibility constraints in Eq. 8. Under the idealized simulator, these scheduling op-portunities can be exploited with little runtime disturbance, allowing workers to approach continuous execution. The real implementation, in contrast, is affected by KV preparation, asynchronous event timing, scheduling overhead, and prediction mismatch, which introduce additional gaps between computations. Therefore, the difference between real execution and simulation mainly reflects prac-tical orchestration overhead. 8Preprint 19 3D16T 38 6D32T 76 12D64T 152 24D128T  

> GPU / worker configuration
> 040 80 120 160
> Capacity (10³ request rounds/s)
> 17.4 34.8 69.7 139.4
> Capacity Ideal concurrency 04k 8k 12k 16k
> Ideal concurrent requests
> 2,040 4,080 8,160 16,321

(a) Capacity scaling. 1664 2176 2400 2816 3328  

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 2,400 requests

(b) 24 GPUs: 4D + 20T .3072 3584 4096 4608 5120  

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 4,096 requests

(c) 38 GPUs: 6D + 32T .

Figure 5: Large-scale simulation of NebulaSD. (a) theoretical capacity and ideal concurrency, (b) and (c) utilization and request service fraction on 24 and 38 GPUs, comparing NebulaSD with Co-located execution. 6.2 SIMULATION FOR SCALING AND CAPACITY MATCHING 

The four-GPU experiments in Section 6.1 show that dynamic pooling substantially improves hard-ware utilization and system request-round processing rate, but under a constrained resource budget this comes with a lower per-request compute-service fraction. We therefore use large-scale sim-ulation to examine the compute-side scaling of dynamic pooling under idealized state movement. Simulation details and extended scaling and load-sensitivity analyses are provided in Appendix H. Fig. 5a shows that, when the draft and target pools are provisioned according to their relative service capacities, the aggregate processing capacity increases approximately proportionally with system size under this idealized execution model. This suggests that the pooled architecture does not intro-duce an inherent stage-level scalability bottleneck on the compute side. The capacity curve serves as a reference for resource provisioning instead of scaling the two stages independently, NebulaSD can increase their pool sizes while preserving a balanced draft-target service ratio. Fig. 5b and 5c further show that request concurrency determines where the system operates relative to this capacity. At lower concurrency, the worker pools are underutilized and additional requests can increase hardware utilization without immediately sacrificing request service quality. Around the request-matched region, NebulaSD reaches about 86% time-weighted SM activity while main-taining a mean request compute-service fraction of 92 .8% -99 .6% across the two configurations. In-creasing concurrency beyond this region no longer improves hardware utilization and progressively reduces the per-request compute-service fraction as the pooled system becomes oversubscribed. In contrast, Co-located execution is constrained by fixed local draft-target pairs: when active requests exceed the batch capacity these pairs can serve concurrently, only a subset can participate in each execution round while others wait behind their assigned pair. NebulaSD removes this local concur-rency constraint by reconstructing batches across the global draft and target pools, sharing available capacity more flexibly. These results complement the small-scale real-system measurements and show that, with appropriately matched draft and target capacity and workload concurrency, Neb-ulaSD can operate near a balanced point that maintains both high hardware utilization and high per-request service quality as the system scales. 

## 7 CONCLUSION 

NebulaSD shows that speculative decoding can benefit from treating draft and target execution as independently provisioned and scheduled serving stages instead of fixed execution pairs. By com-bining shared request pools, worker-triggered batch reconstruction, and migration-aware state prepa-ration, NebulaSD improves effective hardware utilization while keeping most KV-state movement off the execution critical path. Our four-GPU prototype demonstrates that dynamic pooling can translate physical draft-target disaggregation into substantial request-round processing rate gains over both co-located and fixed-pair distributed execution. Profile-driven simulation further shows the compute-side scaling potential of this design under idealized state movement, highlighting the importance of matching draft and target service capacities as worker pools grow. Overall, our results suggest that efficient speculative serving should jointly consider stage-specific resource provision-ing, dynamic batch formation, and state movement rather than preserving fixed cross-stage affinities. 9Preprint 

## REFERENCES 

Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ramjee. Taming the throughput-latency tradeoff in LLM inference with Sarathi-Serve. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24) , pp. 117–134, 2024. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. Tianle Cai, Yuhong Li, Zhengyang Geng, Hongwu Peng, Jason D Lee, Deming Chen, and Tri Dao. Medusa: Simple LLM inference acceleration framework with multiple decoding heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10774 , 2024. Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01318 , 2023. Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(240): 1–113, 2023. Kaiyu Huang, Hao Wu, Zhubo Shi, Han Zou, Minchen Yu, and Qingjiang Shi. AdaSpec: Adaptive speculative decoding for fast, SLO-aware large language model serving. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing , pp. 361–374, 2025. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-ciples , pp. 611–626, 2023. Wonbeom Lee, Jungi Lee, Junghwan Seo, and Jaewoong Sim. InfiniGen: Efficient generative infer-ence of large language models with dynamic KV cache management. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24) , pp. 155–172, 2024. Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative decoding. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023. Xiangchen Li, Dimitrios Spatharakis, Saeid Ghafouri, Jiakun Fan, Hans Vandierendonck, Deepu John, Bo Ji, and Dimitrios S. Nikolopoulos. SLED: A speculative LLM decoding framework for efficient edge serving. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing ,pp. 1–8. ACM, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3769102.3770608. Xiangchen Li, Jiakun Fan, Qingyuan Wang, Dimitrios Spatharakis, Saeid Ghafouri, Hans Vandieren-donck, Deepu John, Bo Ji, Ali R. Butt, and Dimitrios S. Nikolopoulos. WISP: Waste- and interference-suppressed distributed speculative LLM serving at the edge via dynamic drafting and SLO-aware batching. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems , 10(2):1–31, 2026a. doi: 10.1145/3805653. Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. EAGLE: Speculative sampling requires rethinking feature uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15077 , 2024. Zikun Li, Zhuofu Chen, Remi Delacourt, Gabriele Oliaro, Zeyu Wang, Qinghan Chen, Shuhuai Lin, April Yang, Zhihao Zhang, Zhuoming Chen, et al. AdaServe: Accelerating multi-SLO LLM serving with SLO-customized speculative decoding. In Proceedings of the 21st European Conference on Computer Systems , pp. 36–54, 2026b. Shengyu Liu. SwiftLLM: A tiny yet powerful LLM inference system. https://github.com/ interestingLSY/swiftLLM , 2024. GitHub repository. Xiaoxuan Liu, Lanxiang Hu, Peter Bailis, Alvin Cheung, Zhijie Deng, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. Online speculative decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07177 , 2023. 10 Preprint Yuhan Liu, Hanchen Li, Yihua Cheng, Siddhant Ray, Yuyang Huang, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Jiayi Yao, Shan Lu, Ganesh Ananthanarayanan, et al. CacheGen: KV cache compression and streaming for fast large language model serving. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , pp. 38–56, 2024. Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Zhengxin Zhang, Rae Ying Yee Wong, Alan Zhu, Lijie Yang, Xiaoxiang Shi, et al. SpecInfer: Accelerating large language model serving with tree-based speculative inference and verification. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3 , pp. 932–949, 2024a. Xupeng Miao, Chunan Shi, Jiangfei Duan, Xiaoli Xi, Dahua Lin, Bin Cui, and Zhihao Jia. Spot-Serve: Serving generative large language models on preemptible instances. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , pp. 1112–1127, 2024b. Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, ´ I˜ nigo Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ri-cardo Bianchini. Splitwise: Efficient generative LLM inference using phase splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) , pp. 118– 132. IEEE, 2024. Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Feng Ren, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. Mooncake: Trading more storage for less computation—a KVCache-centric architecture for serving LLM chatbot. In 23rd USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 25) , pp. 155–170, 2025. Tianyao Shi, Yanran Wu, Sihang Liu, and Yi Ding. Disaggregated speculative decoding for carbon-efficient LLM serving. IEEE Computer Architecture Letters , 24(2):369–372, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ LCA.2025.3630094. Biao Sun, Ziming Huang, Hanyu Zhao, Wencong Xiao, Xinyi Zhang, Yong Li, and Wei Lin. Llum-nix: Dynamic scheduling for large language model serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24) , pp. 173–191, 2024. Zhenwei Tang, Arun Verma, Zijian Zhou, Zhaoxuan Wu, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. MineDraft: A framework for batch parallel speculative decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18016 , 2026. Jincheng Xie, Yawen Ling, Qi Xiao, Feiyu Zhang, Zhongyi Huang, Wen Hu, and Yu Zheng. SPEC-TRE: Hybrid ordinary-parallel speculative serving for resource-efficient LLM inference, 2026. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yihua Cheng, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shan Lu, and Junchen Jiang. CacheBlend: Fast large language model serving for RAG with cached knowledge fusion. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems ,pp. 94–109, 2025. Fengze Yu, Leshu Li, Brad McDanel, and Saiqian Zhang. DSD: A distributed speculative decoding solution for edge-cloud agile large model serving, 2025. Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and Byung-Gon Chun. Orca: A distributed serving system for transformer-based generative models. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) , pp. 521–538, 2022. Wei Zhang, Zhiyu Wu, Yi Mu, Rui Ning, Banruo Liu, Nikhil Sarda, Myungjin Lee, and Fan Lai. JITServe: SLO-aware LLM serving with imprecise request information. In 23rd USENIX Sym-posium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 26) , pp. 825–848, 2026. Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. DistServe: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24) , pp. 193–210, 2024. 11 Preprint 

## A OVERVIEW OF SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

This appendix provides additional positioning, experimental analysis, implementation details, and scaling results that complement the system design and evaluation presented in the main text. We first position NebulaSD within prior distributed speculative-decoding systems and clarify how its pool-oriented serving abstraction differs from deployment-driven disaggregation. We then characterize the batch-dependent hardware behavior of the draft and target stages, define the time-weighted SM activity metric used in the evaluation, and analyze the interaction between KV migration and fore-ground model execution. Next, we describe the runtime mechanisms that support frequent state mi-gration and the practical realization of the worker-triggered scheduling abstraction in Section 4. We further provide additional real-system experiments that examine migration overhead and robustness across KV-state size, proposal depth, scheduler parameters, request concurrency, and draft-model scale. Finally, we describe the large-scale simulator and extend the scaling analysis beyond the configurations reported in the main text. 1. Positioning within Distributed Speculative Decoding. We compare NebulaSD with rep-resentative distributed speculative-decoding systems and clarify the distinction between deployment-driven disaggregation and the pool-oriented serving problem studied in this work. 2. SM Activity Profiling and Time-Weighted Utilization. We characterize how SM activity and model execution latency vary with batch size for the draft and target stages, and define the time-weighted SM activity metric used to quantify effective hardware utilization in the main evaluation. 3. Compute-KV Migration Interference. We study whether overlapping KV-cache transfers with model execution introduces measurable interference to foreground computation. The analysis considers both host-to-device (H2D) and device-to-host (D2H) KV transfers and distinguishes transfer duration from the observed impact on model forward latency. 4. Detailed System Implementation. We describe the mechanisms used to implement Nebu-laSD efficiently, including persistent HostKV allocation, double-buffered GPU KV banks, shared-memory communication, event-driven notification, process-isolated worker execu-tion, and bounded H2D submission. 5. Practical Scheduler. We complement the scheduling model in the main text with runtime mechanisms required for efficient execution, including event-driven scheduling, early plan-ning on standby banks, planning-progress separation, physical feasibility constraints, and the transition from speculative preparation to actual batch execution. 6. Additional Real-System Evaluation. We evaluate how NebulaSD behaves as KV-state size grows and examine robustness to proposal depth, scheduler parameters, request con-currency, and draft-model scale on the physical four-GPU testbed. 7. Simulation Methodology and Extended Scaling Analysis. We describe the profiling-driven discrete-event simulator used for large-scale evaluation, clarify its differences from the physical runtime, and provide extended results on scaling behavior, request concur-rency, and the utilization-service trade-off across larger worker pools. 

## B POSITIONING WITHIN DISTRIBUTED SPECULATIVE DECODING 

Distributed speculative decoding has recently been explored under several deployment settings, but the separation of draft generation and target verification serves different purposes across these sys-tems. Table 2 summarizes their problem formulations and primary optimization targets. Rather than differing only in implementation details, these systems expose different system bottlenecks after speculative execution is distributed. 

Deployment-driven disaggregation. A common motivation in prior distributed speculative-decoding systems is to exploit resources that are difficult to use efficiently under conventional colo-cated serving. Disaggregated speculative decoding targets heterogeneous accelerator fleets, where a smaller draft model can make productive use of older or lower-end GPUs while target execution remains on more capable devices (Shi et al., 2025). In this setting, physical draft-target separation 12 Preprint Table 2: Representative distributed speculative-decoding systems. The separation of draft and target execution serves different deployment goals and exposes different system bottlenecks.          

> System Setting Motivation System focus
> Disaggregated SD (Shi et al., 2025) Heterogeneous GPUs Reuse weaker GPUs Placement and carbon efficiency SLED (Li et al., 2025) Edge + server Exploit edge compute Shared verification batching WISP (Li et al., 2026a) Edge + server Improve edge-serving efficiency Dynamic drafting and SLO-aware batching DSD (Yu et al., 2025) Edge-cloud Adapt to network and batching effects Adaptive speculation-window control SPECTRE (Xie et al., 2026) Multi-model cloud Reuse idle serving capacity Remote drafting and execution overlap

is primarily a mechanism for heterogeneous resource reuse and carbon-efficient deployment. SLED considers a different source of distributed compute: edge devices that would otherwise contribute lit-tle to centralized LLM inference. Each device performs lightweight drafting locally, while a shared server executes the target model and batches verification requests arriving from multiple devices (Li et al., 2025). WISP builds on this edge-side drafting setting and identifies wasted drafting time and verification interference as its main bottlenecks. Its speculation controller and SLO-aware verifica-tion scheduler therefore optimize how much work is generated at the edge and how heterogeneous verification requests are served at the centralized target (Li et al., 2026a). 

Communication- and resource-driven distributed execution. Other work focuses on the ex-ecution dynamics introduced by distributing speculative decoding itself. DSD studies coordinated draft-target execution across heterogeneous edge-cloud environments, where network latency, batch-ing behavior, and scheduling jointly determine whether speculation remains beneficial. Its primary control variable is the speculation window, which is dynamically adapted to the current execution conditions (Yu et al., 2025). SPECTRE considers multi-model cloud serving rather than edge-cloud deployment. Its motivation comes from long-tailed model demand: lightly loaded model services can provide remote drafting capacity for heavily loaded target services. The resulting scheduling problem is therefore centered on harvesting remote draft capacity while maintaining useful over-lap between drafting and target verification under multi-tenant traffic (Xie et al., 2026). Together, these studies show that distributed speculative execution can expose useful resources across het-erogeneous GPUs, edge devices, edge-cloud deployments, and multi-model services, while also introducing deployment-specific communication and scheduling challenges. 

Pool-oriented speculative serving. The system problem considered in this work begins from a different point in the design space. We assume that draft and target resources have already been physically separated and ask how those resources should be organized when many concurrent re-quests repeatedly alternate between the two stages. The physical separation of draft and target execution is therefore a starting point rather than the optimization objective itself. Because drafting and verification can exhibit different batch-size scaling and service capacities, statically preserving request or batch affinity after disaggregation can fragment capacity across workers: one worker or stage may become locally constrained while usable capacity remains elsewhere. This observation leads to a different system abstraction. Rather than treating distributed speculative decoding primarily as communication between a drafter and a verifier, we model the two stages as independently provisioned worker pools, D = {d1, . . . , d M } and T = {t1, . . . , t N }. Requests re-peatedly enter the shared request pool of their next stage and need not preserve worker or batch affin-ity across speculative rounds. The resulting scheduling question is therefore which requests should form the next batch of an available worker, subject to predecessor readiness, worker availability, state readiness, and the service characteristics of that stage. This motivates the worker-triggered batch reconstruction formulation in Section 4. 13 Preprint 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024         

> Batch size
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM Active (%)
> SM Active Compute time
> 010 20 30 40 50
> Compute time (ms)
> (a) Draft model. 124816 32 64 128
> Number of requests verified (d=4)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM Active (%)
> SM Active Compute time
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute time (ms) (b) Target model.

Figure 6: Batch-size profiling of SM activity and computation latency under a fixed context length of 128. (a) A single draft-model forward. (b) target verification with speculative depth d = 4 . SM Active is measured during model computation, while computation latency is obtained from runs without SM sampling. Removing worker affinity also changes the role of state movement. In deployment-oriented dis-tributed speculative decoding, communication is primarily induced by separating draft and target execution across devices or services. Under pool-oriented scheduling, state movement additionally arises from dynamically reassigning a request among workers of the same stage across successive speculative rounds. NebulaSD therefore treats KV-state migration and advance preparation as en-abling mechanisms for resource pooling: state is prepared according to upcoming scheduling deci-sions and overlapped with foreground execution so that dynamic reassignment does not directly seri-alize worker computation. Consequently, the central system quantities in our study are stage service capacity, batch formation efficiency, worker utilization, request service, and migration-induced ex-ecution gaps, rather than deployment-specific objectives such as edge utilization, carbon efficiency, speculation-window adaptation, or remote-drafter reuse. 

## C SM A CTIVITY PROFILING AND TIME -W EIGHTED UTILIZATION 

Time-weighted SM activity. Compute-time fraction alone does not fully characterize GPU uti-lization. A worker may spend a large fraction of time executing model forwards while each forward activates only a small fraction of the available SM resources. Conversely, high SM activity during individual forwards does not imply high system utilization if long idle gaps remain between con-secutive computations. We therefore use time-weighted SM activity in Section 6.1 to jointly capture how frequently the GPUs perform model computation and how intensively their SM resources are exercised during those computations. Let T comp  

> g,k

denote the duration of compute interval k on GPU g, and let Ag,k ∈ [0 , 1] denote the calibrated SM Active corresponding to the stage and batch configuration executed during that in-terval. Over a measurement window of length Twindow on G GPUs, we define the system-level time-weighted SM activity as 

Ueff =

P

> g

P 

> k

T comp  

> g,k

Ag,k 

GT window 

. (C.1) Idle GPU-time therefore contributes zero, while compute intervals with higher SM activity con-tribute proportionally more. The contribution of a particular stage is obtained by restricting the summation to compute intervals of that stage, and the draft and target contributions sum to Ueff .This metric captures both temporal utilization and within-batch hardware activity. SM Active is ob-tained from offline profiling rather than sampled during the end-to-end experiments to avoid profiler interference. 

Batch-size profiling. Fig. 6 shows that the draft and target stages exhibit substantially different relationships between batch size, hardware activity, and compute latency. For the draft model, in-creasing the batch size from 1 to 512 raises SM Active from approximately 9.1% to 86 .8% , while 14 Preprint the latency of a single forward remains roughly within 16 -18 ms. Only at batch size 1024 does the compute latency increase substantially, reaching 38 .6 ms with an SM Active of 95 .1% . This indi-cates substantial batching headroom in the draft stage, larger batches can activate considerably more GPU resources without proportionally increasing forward latency. The target stage reaches high SM activity much earlier. Its SM Active is already approximately 

74 .1% at verifying 1 request with 4 drafting tokens and reaches 87 .5% at 32 requests. Increasing the number of verifying requests further to 64 and 128 raises SM Active to approximately 93 .2% and 

95 .7% , respectively, but also increases compute latency from approximately 28 .8 ms at batch size 

32 to 46 .3 and 82 .8 ms. The target stage therefore has considerably less batching headroom than the draft stage. These different scaling characteristics motivate stage-specific batch reconstruction in NebulaSD, preserving the same batch organization across the two stages can either leave substantial draft capacity unused or push the target stage into a less favorable latency regime. 

Relation to the end-to-end evaluation. The time-weighted metric in Eq. C.1 combines the two utilization dimensions exposed by this profiling. A configuration with high compute occupancy may still have low effective hardware activity if it repeatedly executes poorly utilized batches, while a configuration with high SM Active may remain inefficient if long idle gaps separate consecutive computations. NebulaSD improves both aspects by reconstructing stage-specific batches and reduc-ing execution bubbles between successive computations. This explains why the time-weighted SM activity reported in Section 6.1 provides a more complete view of effective hardware utilization than compute occupancy or average batch size alone. 

## D COMPUTE -KV M IGRATION INTERFERENCE 

Experimental setup. NebulaSD overlaps KV migration with foreground model execution to hide state-transfer latency from the critical path. However, asynchronous H2D and D2H transfers may still interfere with model execution through shared GPU, interconnect, and runtime resources. We therefore conduct a single-GPU microbenchmark to quantify this interference under controlled trans-fer sizes. The draft experiment uses Qwen3-0.6B with batch size 128, while the target experiment uses Qwen3-8B with batch size 32 and speculative depth d = 4 . For each model, we overlap fore-ground execution with H2D or D2H KV transfers ranging from 2 MiB to 1024 MiB and compare two implementations, one in which transfer submission shares the foreground execution process and one in which migration is handled by a separate process. H2D follows NebulaSD’s bounded submis-sion policy with 32 MiB transfer chunks, while D2H uses the current whole-plan submission path. We report the relative increase in foreground execution latency over the corresponding no-migration baseline, 

∆T = Toverlap − Tbase 

Tbase 

. (D.1) 

Overlap interference. Fig. 7 shows that KV migration can generally overlap with foreground computation at low cost for small and moderate transfer sizes, while very large transfers expose stronger interference. The effect is particularly pronounced for same-process D2H submission. At 1024 MiB, the draft execution slowdown reaches 28 .47% and the target slowdown reaches 46 .13% .Moving migration to a separate process reduces these values to only 2.05% and 3.07% , respectively. H2D exhibits the same qualitative benefit, although the interference is less severe, at 1024 MiB, process isolation reduces the slowdown from 9.19% to 0.45% for draft execution and from 4.48% to 

3.10% for target execution. These results indicate that asynchronous transfer itself is not necessarily expensive for foreground execution. Instead, how large migration operations are submitted and coordinated can determine whether their tail becomes exposed on the foreground critical path. 

Source of the large-D2H slowdown. The sharp increase observed for large same-process D2H transfers cannot be explained by transfer duration alone. When the D2H size increases from 512 MiB to 1024 MiB, the measured copy-active time grows approximately linearly from 20 .4 ms to 40 .8 ms. In contrast, foreground execution latency increases nonlinearly, the draft slowdown rises from ap-proximately 6.3% to 28 .5% , while the target slowdown rises from approximately 4.6% to 46 .1% .15 Preprint 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024 

> Total KV transferred per sample (MiB)
> -1 01234510 20 30
> Model compute latency increased(%)
> H2D, same process H2D, separate process D2H, same process D2H, separate process

(a) Draft model. 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024  

> Total KV transferred per sample (MiB)
> -1 01234510 20 30 40
> Model compute latency increased(%)  H2D, same process H2D, separate process D2H, same process D2H, separate process

(b) Target model. 

Figure 7: Foreground execution slowdown when KV migration overlaps with model execution. We compare H2D and D2H transfers submitted from the foreground process and from a separate migration process. The y-axis reports latency increase relative to the no-migration baseline; the region above 5% is visually compressed to preserve detail in the low-interference regime. Nsight traces further show that the model kernels themselves change only slightly. For draft ex-ecution, kernel-active time increases from approximately 26 .046 ms to 26 .318 ms, while the cor-responding target kernel-active time changes from approximately 26 .824 ms to 27 .225 ms. The large end-to-end slowdown therefore does not correspond to a proportional slowdown of foreground model kernels. Instead, the traces show that a latency-sensitive result readback issued by the foreground model can be delayed behind the large background D2H operation. Under same-process 1024 MiB D2H migra-tion, the observed readback wait reaches approximately 15 .45 ms for draft execution and 7.58 ms for target execution. With migration isolated in a separate process, these waits decrease to ap-proximately 0.66 ms and 0.26 ms, respectively. In the same-process traces, the small foreground readback tends to begin only after the tail of the large KV transfer has completed, whereas process isolation allows it to make progress substantially earlier. The evidence therefore suggests that the dominant large-transfer penalty arises from transfer scheduling and head-of-line interference that delays latency-sensitive foreground operations, rather than from a sudden bandwidth collapse or a comparable slowdown of the model kernels themselves. 

Implications for NebulaSD. These results show that KV migration can be aggressively over-lapped with model execution without substantially extending the foreground critical path, provided that large background transfers are prevented from blocking latency-sensitive operations. In par-ticular, the large-D2H experiments show that the dominant exposed overhead arises from transfer scheduling and delayed foreground readback rather than a proportional slowdown of model ker-nels. This observation motivates NebulaSD’s process-isolated migration path and bounded transfer submission, whose implementation is described in Appendix E.4. The experiment is a controlled single-GPU microbenchmark and does not uniquely attribute the observed interference to a spe-cific CUDA runtime or copy-engine mechanism. Nevertheless, it demonstrates that careful transfer coordination is necessary for hiding KV migration behind useful computation. 

## E DETAILED SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 

NebulaSD separates the scheduling abstraction from the mechanisms used to manage KV residency and execute individual batches. Both draft and target workers expose the same runtime interface to the scheduler, while maintaining independent model-specific KV storage. We describe the imple-mentation details that are most relevant to state migration below. 16 Preprint E.1 PERSISTENT HOST KV A LLOCATION 

NebulaSD maintains long-lived host-resident KV arenas for both the draft and target models. Each arena is backed by a shared-memory region and contains contiguous K and V planes. Workers address KV state using numeric offsets within these arenas rather than transferring process-local pointers or dynamically allocated buffers. For a request r with prompt length Pr , maximum generation length Gr , and KV block size B, the Engine reserves an extent of 

Cr =

 Pr + Gr

B



(E.1) blocks when the request is admitted. The extent remains stable throughout the request lifetime and is recycled only after the request and all outstanding copies have retired. Consequently, migration does not require repeated host-buffer allocation or address remapping as the request moves between workers. The shared mapping is registered with CUDA by the direct memory access (DMA) process and the registration is reused across subsequent transfers. Registration is therefore performed at the arena level rather than for individual requests or migration operations. The runtime separately tracks the valid KV length and version of each request, allowing a worker to identify the corresponding HostKV extent using compact metadata. For writeback, NebulaSD transfers only the KV suffix that has changed since the last committed host version. The persistent prefix remains in HostKV and can be reused by subsequent workers. This reduces D2H traffic while preserving a stable host-side state from which either worker pool can reconstruct the required device-resident state. E.2 DOUBLE -B UFFERED GPU KV B ANKS 

Each worker maintains two pre-allocated GPU KV banks. The two banks decouple foreground computation from preparation of the next scheduled batch: while one bank is used by the current batch, the other bank can reconstruct its layout and import KV state for a future batch. Internally, a bank progresses through the following physical states: FREE → FILLING → READY → COMPUTING → EXPORTING → FREE . (E.2) A bank enters F ILLING after the runtime reserves its rows and physical KV blocks. It becomes READY only after the required metadata and H2D state preparation have completed. The runtime may select a R EADY bank for computation once the worker becomes available. After computation, any updated KV suffix is asynchronously exported to HostKV before the physical bank is released. Importantly, bank retirement is determined by physical completion rather than by model-output availability. The result of a batch may therefore become visible to the scheduler while its old bank is still exporting KV state. The other bank can meanwhile become ready and begin the next compu-tation. This permits, for example, COMPUTE k+1 ∥ D2H k, COMPUTE k ∥ H2D k+1 , (E.3) without allowing a background transfer to overwrite the storage used by an active computation. The two banks use separate KV block ranges but share a bounded pool of logical batch rows. The scheduler therefore accounts for rows still retained by the other bank when determining whether a new batch can be prepared. This constraint is discussed further in Section F. E.3 SHARED -M EMORY CONTROL PLANE 

NebulaSD separates persistent state publication from explicit command delivery. High frequency runtime facts, such as bank state, compute state, KV readiness, and request progress, are published 17 Preprint into fixed layout shared-memory tables. The tables are partitioned by writer role, and each partition contains a dedicated row for every active request. Different runtime components therefore update disjoint memory regions even when they operate on the same request. Within a writer partition, a request row has only one authorized writer at a time, request epochs, worker generations, and operation fences prevent a stale or previously assigned worker from publishing into a row after ownership changes. This single-writer organization avoids mutexes on the publication path. Readers obtain consistent snapshots using a lightweight sequence-based publication protocol, allowing the Engine to observe frequently changing worker state without serializing updates through conventional process-level remote procedure call (RPC) messages. The Engine maintains the coarse-grained canonical state required for global coordination, including request identity and lifecycle, accepted output, HostKV allocation, and issued-work bookkeeping. Fine-grained execution state, including bank ownership, H2D and D2H progress, and local runtime state, remains worker-owned and is exposed to the Engine through the shared observation tables. This separation avoids continuously mirroring the worker runtime inside the centralized scheduler. Explicit work submission is carried by bounded single-producer, single-consumer shared-memory rings. The corresponding payload contains numeric identities, offsets, epochs, and compact descrip-tors rather than KV tensors or Python objects. State-change rings similarly carry only references to modified table rows; the table itself remains the source of truth. On Linux, NebulaSD uses eventfd as a lightweight doorbell between processes. A doorbell indi-cates that new work or state changes may be available, but does not carry the corresponding payload. Multiple wakeups may therefore be coalesced without affecting correctness. After receiving a door-bell, the consumer drains the corresponding ring and reads the authoritative shared-memory state. If a notification ring overflows, the reader can recover by scanning publication sequence numbers in the underlying table. E.4 PROCESS -I SOLATED WORKER RUNTIME 

A logical NebulaSD worker is implemented using three cooperating processes: a control process ,an execution process , and a DMA process . The same organization is used for both draft and target workers. The control process owns the local runtime state machine. It processes scheduler commands, pre-pares model inputs, manages bank transitions and dependencies, and publishes execution facts to the shared observation plane. The execution process owns the model and its device-resident KV storage and is kept deliberately narrow, once a complete model job is provided by the control process, it performs the corresponding GPU computation and returns the result. In particular, control-plane processing, KV-copy completion handling, and metadata publication do not execute alongside the model in this process. The DMA process independently owns KV-copy submission and completion. GPU KV storage is shared with the DMA process at worker initialization, after which the control path communicates copy plans using lightweight descriptors. H2D and D2H operations are issued on dedicated CUDA copy streams without requiring the execution process to poll their completion. This organization is motivated by the latency sensitivity of GPU submission from the host. CPU scheduling delays, Python runtime activity, copy-completion handling, and control-plane work can otherwise introduce gaps between model operations even when sufficient GPU resources are avail-able. Process isolation does not remove these costs, but prevents most of them from sharing the execution process’s latency-critical CPU path. E.5 BOUNDED H2D S UBMISSION 

NebulaSD additionally bounds the amount of H2D work submitted to the GPU at once. Within a single KV bank, H2D preparation and D2H writeback are serialized by the bank lifecycle and there-fore do not overlap with each other. However, the two logical banks of a worker can be in different phases simultaneously. For example, while one bank is restoring the KV state of an upcoming batch through H2D transfers, the other bank may still be writing back the updated KV state of the previous 18 Preprint CPU GPU DMA   

> Submit H2D Submit D2H
> H2D (Bank B) D2H
> D2H latency Time

Figure 8: Timeline without chunked H2D transfers. CPU GPU DMA     

> Submit H2D chunks Submit D2H
> H2D 1 H2D 2 H2D 3 H2D 4 D2H
> D2H latency Time

Figure 9: Timeline with chunked H2D transfers. batch through D2H transfers. These banks are logical partitions of the same worker GPU rather than independent devices, so their transfers ultimately share the same underlying GPU copy resources. Although CUDA-capable devices may execute H2D and D2H transfers concurrently, asynchronous submission from different streams does not by itself guarantee that the resulting transfers will over-lap efficiently at the device level. Transfers issued for different banks can still contend for the same copy engines and hardware work queues, and a sufficiently long sequence of outstanding H2D op-erations may delay a D2H transfer issued by the other bank as shown in Fig. 8. This situation arises naturally in NebulaSD when the standby bank begins restoring a large future batch while the previously active bank is still completing its KV writeback. To limit this queueing effect, NebulaSD divides large H2D plans into bounded chunks as shown in Fig. 9. In our implementation, the default H2D window is 32 MiB. Only a bounded group of chunks is submitted before the DMA process waits for its completion and submits the next group. D2H writeback from the other bank remains independently submittable during this process. Chunking therefore does not change the per-bank ordering of H2D and D2H operations. Instead, it limits the amount of H2D work from one bank that can accumulate ahead of D2H traffic from the other bank, reducing cross-bank head-of-line blocking on the shared GPU copy path. This mechanism addresses interference between concurrent KV transfers. Its purpose is distinct from the compute-transfer interference studied in Appendix D, where we measure whether concur-rent H2D or D2H activity changes the execution time of foreground model kernels. 

## F PRACTICAL SCHEDULER 

The optimization in Section 4 describes worker-triggered batch reconstruction over a set of stage-eligible requests, where the destination worker is determined by the scheduling opportunity. The runtime implementation preserves this abstraction but introduces additional mechanisms to bound scheduling overhead, expose preparation opportunities early, and respect transient physical-resource constraints. F.1 EVENT -D RIVEN SCHEDULING 

NebulaSD adopts an event-driven scheduling design rather than periodically rerunning the scheduler at a fixed clock interval. A new scheduling decision is useful only when the runtime state changes in a way that may affect the set of requests available for reconstruction or the preparation capac-19 Preprint ity exposed by a worker. Repeatedly invoking the scheduler while neither condition has changed would introduce additional control-plane overhead without creating a meaningful new scheduling opportunity. Accordingly, NebulaSD opens or revisits a worker-local planning opportunity when runtime events change either its candidate requests or its available preparation capacity. Typical examples include worker initialization, request admission, completion or dispatch of an ongoing computation, request cancellation, resource retirement, and bank-state transitions that expose preparation capacity. Mul-tiple events occurring within a short interval are incorporated into a common state snapshot before scheduling, avoiding repeated reconstruction over nearly identical states. To bound scheduling over-head, detailed prediction and reconstruction are restricted to a bounded priority-ordered subset of eligible requests, this implementation bound does not change the worker-local objective in Eq. 8. 

Early planning across speculative stages. NebulaSD may include a request in next-stage recon-struction before its predecessor computation has completed. For example, once a draft batch has been issued, its requests are known to subsequently require target execution, and their predecessor completion times can be predicted from the running draft batch. When a target worker exposes a preparation opportunity on its standby bank, the scheduler may therefore consider such requests for target-side reconstruction before their proposal tokens are available. Their target-side KV states cor-respond to previously committed tokens and can be prepared as soon as the required HostKV source state is available, while the eventual target execution remains gated by publication of the draft result. The same mechanism applies symmetrically from target to draft. 

Early planning on the standby bank. A preparation opportunity may also be exposed by the worker itself. Once a prepared batch is dispatched for computation, the worker’s current compute capacity is occupied, but its other bank may become available for future preparation. If the standby bank satisfies the physical-capacity constraints described in Section F.2, NebulaSD may immediately reconstruct another future batch for this worker rather than waiting for the running computation to complete. NebulaSD can therefore reconstruct and prepare the worker’s next batch on its standby bank while the current batch is still executing. Together, these mechanisms provide the information and capacity required for look-ahead schedul-ing: running predecessor batches expose requests that can be considered before their outputs are available, while standby banks expose worker-local preparation opportunities that can host future batches. This allows scheduling and KV-state preparation to overlap with ongoing model execution without changing the execution dependencies between draft and target stages. 

Scheduling-execution overlap. These mechanisms allow both scheduling and state preparation to be moved away from the critical path between consecutive GPU computations. Conceptually, NebulaSD attempts to realize 

Run( Bk)

| {z }

> current computation

∥ Plan( Bk+1 ) + Prepare( Bk+1 )

| {z }

> future batch

, (F.1) rather than strictly serializing 

Run( Bk) → Plan( Bk+1 ) → Prepare( Bk+1 ) → Run( Bk+1 ). (F.2) The objective is not simply to invoke the scheduler earlier, but to complete as much future planning and preparation as possible before the current computation retires. When a future batch has already been reconstructed, assigned, and prepared, the completion of the current batch requires only the remaining readiness conditions to be checked before the next computation can start. 

Example. The following example illustrates how this overlap is realized for a target worker with two logical banks. Consider a target worker t0 with two logical banks, A and B. Suppose bank A

is currently executing target batch BX , while bank B exposes a preparation opportunity for t0. At the same time, draft worker d0 is executing a draft batch BD = {r1, r 2, r 3, r 4, r 5, r 6}. Although its proposal tokens are not yet available, the predicted completion times of these requests allow them to be considered for future target execution. 20 Preprint For the preparation opportunity on bank B of t0, suppose the target scheduler reconstructs BY =

{r1, r 2, r 3, r 4} from the shared target request pool. NebulaSD does not require the target stage to preserve the draft batch membership, so r5 and r6 remain available for subsequent worker-triggered reconstruction opportunities. In general, a reconstructed batch may merge requests originating from different predecessor batches or split requests that previously executed together. Although BY cannot yet execute, its batch membership and destination bank are now fixed. The target-side KV states required by r1, . . . , r 4 correspond to previously committed tokens and there-fore do not depend on the proposal currently being generated by the draft model. If these states are available in HostKV, NebulaSD can begin preparing BY on bank B while the draft computation is still running and bank A continues executing BX .Conceptually, one possible execution order is: 

time --------------------------------------------------------> draft d0: |-------------- draft(B_D) ---------------| ˆ|InputReady target t0 / Bank A: |--------- target(B_X) ---------| ˆ|WorkerReady target t0 / Bank B: |--- Prepare(B_Y) ----|...................|-- target(B_Y) --| ˆ|KVReady 

Here, the dotted interval denotes a prepared batch waiting for its remaining dependencies. In the illustrated ordering, the H2D preparation of BY completes first, so the required target KV state is already resident on bank B. Bank A subsequently finishes BX , restoring target compute capacity. The batch still cannot execute until the draft computation publishes the proposal tokens required by r1, . . . , r 4. Once the readiness conditions defined in Section 4 are satisfied, BY can transition directly from the prepared state to target execution. Importantly, the completion of KV preparation, the retirement of BX , and the publication of the draft result do not independently trigger reconstruction of BY . Its membership and destination bank were fixed during the earlier worker-local planning step. These later events only advance the prepared batch toward execution, allowing the progress path to remain lightweight. 

Planning and progress paths. NebulaSD therefore separates two logically distinct control paths. The planning path reacts to events that expose or change a worker-local batch-reconstruction op-portunity, such as newly available candidate requests or preparation capacity on a standby bank, and invokes the stage scheduler for that worker. The progress path handles events that only change the readiness of an already selected batch, such as H2D completion, predecessor-result publication, or restoration of compute capacity. These events perform a lightweight readiness check rather than rerunning batch reconstruction. This separation avoids repeatedly executing the more expensive scheduling logic for a frozen batch while still exposing preparation opportunities early enough to overlap scheduling, KV preparation, and GPU execution. F.2 PHYSICAL FEASIBILITY CONSTRAINTS 

Before admitting a reconstructed batch for a triggered worker, the implementation checks whether the batch can be physically prepared on the worker’s available bank. In addition to the logical 21 Preprint constraints in Section 4, a candidate batch must satisfy the worker’s batch-row capacity, GPU KV-block capacity, and stage-specific token limit. Each request must also fit the worker individually. Double buffering introduces an additional transient constraint. The two banks share the worker’s finite row namespace, and the previously active bank may retain rows while computation or D2H writeback is still in progress. The effective row capacity of the standby bank is therefore reduced by the rows still owned by the other bank. A bank is considered a valid preparation destination only when its current role and physical state permit a new layout to be installed. The scheduler also treats already issued work as a reservation. A worker with a prepared future batch cannot receive another future preparation for the same destination capacity, and requests already included in an issued preparation are excluded from subsequent reconstruction. These constraints prevent speculative scheduling decisions from overcommitting physical bank resources. F.3 FROM PREPARE TO RUN 

The implementation separates worker capacity for preparation from capacity for computation . A worker may therefore be unavailable for immediate execution while still being a valid destination for preparation on its standby bank. Once the scheduler reconstructs a batch for such a preparation opportunity, NebulaSD issues a P RE - 

> PARE

operation that fixes the batch membership, destination worker, bank identity, and expected state versions. The worker can then allocate the bank layout and start the required H2D transfer while its current batch is still executing. This prepared batch remains reserved rather than being reconstructed at every subsequent event. A prepared batch is converted into a R UN operation only when the runtime confirms the three con-ditions represented abstractly in the main text: INPUT READY ∧ KVR EADY ∧ WORKER READY . (F.3) Here, INPUT READY confirms that the required predecessor-stage result has been published, KVR EADY confirms that the expected KV version is resident in the assigned bank, and W ORK -

> ER

READY confirms that the worker has regained compute capacity. Runtime identities and epochs are checked again before dispatch so that stale preparations are not executed after cancellation or state changes. This two-step P REPARE →RUN protocol is the runtime realization of the advance-planning model in Section 4. Predicted completion times determine which future state should be prepared, whereas real runtime events determine when that state is safe to execute. 

## G ADDITIONAL REAL -S YSTEM EVALUATION 

This section provides additional real-system evaluation of NebulaSD on the four RTX4090 GPUs, focusing on both runtime overhead and robustness across different operating conditions. We first examine how increasing KV-state size affects migration overhead and the extent to which state movement becomes exposed on the execution critical path. We then evaluate sensitivity to the pro-posal depth and scheduler parameters, vary request concurrency without workload-specific retuning to characterize the operating regime of resource pooling, and replace the default draft model with a larger model to examine robustness to the draft-target capacity balance. G.1 SENSITIVITY TO KV-S TATE GROWTH 

Dynamic request reassignment requires the execution state of a request to follow its scheduling decisions, making migration increasingly important as the KV state grows. We therefore vary the maximum generation length among 128, 256, and 512 tokens while keeping the model pair, 512 sub-mitted requests, proposal depth of 4, scheduler configuration, KV capacity, and worker initialization unchanged. NebulaSD uses two draft and two target workers with maximum batch sizes of 128 and 32, respectively. All three NebulaSD measurements use the same production implementation and differ only in the maximum generation length during formal measurement. 22 Preprint 128 256 512       

> Maximum generated tokens
> 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500
> Request rounds / s
> 1,119 1,087 1,070 1,262 1,244 856* 1,813 1,626 1,147 Co-located Native Distributed NebulaSD
> 128 256 512
> Maximum generated tokens
> 010 20 30 40
> Exposed KV-ready wait (ms/batch) 0.57 9.26 31.06 3.69 7.30 23.51
> Draft Target

Figure 10: Sensitivity to KV-state growth. Left: request-round processing rate as the maximum generation length increases. Right: exposed KV-ready waiting time per batch in NebulaSD. The Native Distributed result at 512 tokens ( *) uses 64 rather than 128 resident requests per draft-target pair because the original configuration exceeds target-GPU memory capacity. Table 3: KV-migration statistics under increasing KV-state size. Values are draft / target. Effective H2D rate is measured over the observed migration-execution interval and should not be interpreted as the physical PCIe peak bandwidth. 

Max gen. H2D/batch (MiB) Effective H2D (GB/s) Exposed KV wait (ms) 

128 690.65 / 307.50 19.91 / 18.65 0.57 / 3.69 256 1065.31 / 491.60 16.72 / 17.34 9.26 / 7.30 512 1837.07 / 911.24 13.42 / 14.34 31.06 / 23.51 

Figure 10 shows that the benefit of dynamic pooling decreases as the KV state grows. At maxi-mum generation lengths of 128 and 256 tokens, NebulaSD processes 1813.28 and 1625.96 request rounds/s, compared with 1118.62 and 1086.59 rounds/s for Co-located and 1262.24 and 1244.47 rounds/s for Native Distributed. This corresponds to improvements of 62.1% and 49.6% over Co-located and 43.7% and 30.7% over Native Distributed, respectively. At 512 tokens, NebulaSD reaches 1146.78 rounds/s, remaining 7.1% above the 1070.41 rounds/s of Co-located execution. The original Native Distributed configuration cannot retain 128 requests per pair at this length because its target-side resident KV state exceeds the available GPU-memory capacity, the capacity-adjusted run shown in Fig. 10 therefore uses 64 requests per pair and is not treated as an equal-configuration performance comparison. All methods receive the same 512 submitted requests, while their resident active concurrency follows the corresponding serving architecture. 

Exposed migration delay. Raw transfer latency does not directly determine execution overhead because KV migration can overlap with predecessor execution and worker computation. We there-fore measure only the portion of KV preparation that remains exposed after the other execution dependencies are ready. For batch i, let Ii denote its input-ready time, Wi the time when the destination worker becomes available, Hi the completion time of its H2D migration, and Mi the completion time of KV metadata preparation. Its KV-ready time is Ki = max( Hi, M i), and we define the exposed KV-ready wait as 

Ei = [ Ki − max( Ii, W i)] + . (G.1) This metric counts only the interval during which input and worker readiness would otherwise permit execution but KV preparation remains incomplete; migration hidden behind another unresolved dependency therefore contributes zero exposed wait. To isolate the migration component further, we additionally compute EH2D  

> i

= [ Hi − max( Ii, W i, M i)] +.Table 3 shows that KV migration becomes increasingly exposed as the request state grows. Larger KV states increase the amount of data transferred per batch and keep transfers in flight for longer, while the observed effective H2D rate decreases as concurrent transfers increasingly contend for 23 Preprint Table 4: Real-system sensitivity to the proposal depth and scheduler parameters. Processing rates are completed request rounds/s and are reported as mean ± one sample standard deviation over three runs.                                                                         

> (a) Proposal-depth sensitivity.
> Depth Co-located Native NebulaSD Gain vs. Co-loc. Gain vs. Native
> 31359 ±81506 ±31968 ±42 +44 .8% +30 .7%
> 41117 ±01269 ±41884 ±25 +68 .7% +48 .5%
> 5976 ±31153 ±31682 ±57 +72 .3% +45 .9%
> (b) Scheduler-parameter sensitivity.
> gsscale ∆s
> Setting Rounds/s ∆Setting Rounds/s ∆0.5×1864 ±12 −1.05% 0 ms 1890 ±9+0 .29% 1.0×1884 ±25 –30 ms 1884 ±25 –
> 1.5×1887 ±10 +0 .17% 60 ms 1888 ±23 +0 .22%

the shared host-device transfer path. Together, the larger migration volume and lower effective transfer rate cause more KV preparation to remain unfinished after input and worker readiness have been satisfied, increasing the exposed KV-ready wait at longer generation lengths. The H2D-only exposed-wait estimate closely tracks the overall KV-ready wait across all evaluated lengths and both stages, differing by at most 0.49 ms per batch, indicating that H2D migration rather than metadata preparation is the dominant source of exposed KV delay. This behavior primarily reflects the host-device bandwidth limitation of our four-RTX-4090-GPU testbed. NebulaSD continues to overlap KV migration with model execution using the same schedul-ing and preparation pipeline, but the KV footprint grows with sequence length while the available migration bandwidth remains fixed. Longer transfers also increase contention among concurrent H2D and D2H operations on the shared PCIe and GPU copy path. As a result, an increasing fraction of otherwise asynchronous KV migration becomes exposed on the execution critical path, which is the primary cause of the processing-rate degradation observed as the maximum generation length increases from 128 to 512 tokens. Because the reported effective H2D rate includes chunk submis-sion, synchronization, and concurrent use of the copy path, we do not attribute its reduction solely to the physical PCIe link; rather, the results identify the available host-device transfer capacity of the current platform as the main bottleneck limiting migration overlap in this regime. G.2 SENSITIVITY TO PROPOSAL DEPTH AND SCHEDULER PARAMETERS 

We next examine whether the measured benefit depends on the default proposal depth or on a nar-rowly tuned scheduler configuration. These experiments use 512 submitted requests with a 128-token generation limit. Each condition is repeated three times, and Table 4 reports the mean request-round processing rate and one sample standard deviation. For scheduler sensitivity, the proposal depth remains fixed at 4 and only one parameter group is varied at a time. 

Proposal depth. The main evaluation uses a proposal depth of 4. We additionally evaluate depths of 3 and 5 while keeping the submitted workload and resource configuration unchanged. Changing the proposal depth changes the computation performed by both stages in each speculative round and therefore changes the absolute request-round rate of all three systems. Nevertheless, NebulaSD consistently provides the highest processing rate: its rates at depths 3, 4, and 5 are 1.31 ×, 1.48 ×,and 1.46 × those of Native Distributed and 1.45 ×, 1.69 ×, and 1.72 × those of Co-located execution, respectively. The resource-pooling benefit is therefore not specific to the default depth of 4. For depths 3 and 5, the scheduler retains the measured depth-4 profiling table and scales predicted compute cost according to the executed proposal workload: draft cost is scaled with the number of draft forwards and target cost with the anchor-plus-proposal token count. This scaling affects only online cost prediction; all processing rates in Table 4 are measured from real model execution. We 24 Preprint 256 384 512       

> Simultaneously arriving requests
> 0500 1000 1500 2000
> Request round / s
> NebulaSD Native Distributed Co-located
> 256 384 512
> Simultaneously arriving requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Time-weighted SM active (%)
> 256 384 512
> Simultaneously arriving requests
> 020 40 60 80 100 120
> Mean Draft compute gap (ms)
> 256 384 512
> Simultaneously arriving requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Mean Target compute gap (ms)

Figure 11: Sensitivity to submitted request concurrency. The panels report steady-state request-round processing rate, time-weighted SM activity, mean Draft compute gap, and mean Target compute gap. The same NebulaSD scheduler configuration is used for all request counts without workload-specific retuning. therefore use these experiments to test robustness of the serving architecture across nearby proposal depths rather than to characterize proposal-depth selection itself. 

Scheduler parameters. The reconstruction policy exposes the stage-specific target service inter-val gs and the additional batch-formation slack ∆s. The default draft/target service intervals are 160/130 ms and the default slack is 30 ms. We jointly scale the two service intervals by 0.5×, 1.0×,and 1.5×, corresponding to 80/65, 160/130, and 240/195 ms, and separately vary ∆s among 0, 30, and 60 ms while keeping gs at its default. The request-round rate remains within 1.05% of the de-fault across all evaluated configurations. The measured performance therefore does not rely on a narrow optimum of either scheduler parameter within the evaluated range. G.3 SENSITIVITY TO REQUEST CONCURRENCY 

We further evaluate whether the benefit of NebulaSD depends on the 512-request workload used in the main evaluation. We vary the number of simultaneously submitted requests among 256, 384, and 512 while keeping the model pair, the 2D + 2T resource configuration, the proposal depth, the batch-size limits, and the scheduler parameters unchanged. In particular, the draft/target tar-get service intervals remain 160/130 ms and the batch-formation slack remains 30 ms for all three workloads, without workload-specific retuning. The resident baselines retain their original execu-tion organizations, whereas NebulaSD admits the submitted requests into shared stage-level request pools. This experiment therefore evaluates how the original serving architectures respond to increas-ing offered concurrency rather than enforcing equal resident concurrency across methods. Figure 11 shows a clear concurrency-dependent crossover. At 256 submitted requests, Native Dis-tributed slightly outperforms NebulaSD in steady-state request-round processing rate. In this regime, the fixed draft-target pairs already have sufficient local work, and the shared request pools in Neb-25 Preprint Table 5: Sensitivity to the draft-model scale under the 512-request workload. Processing rates are completed request rounds/s.                

> Draft model Co-located Native NebulaSD vs. Native vs. Co-loc.
> Qwen3-0.6B 1116 .65 1268 .98 1883 .99 1.48 ×1.69 ×
> Qwen3-1.7B 1130 .14 1241 .51 1802 .22 1.45 ×1.59 ×

ulaSD provide limited additional opportunity for reconstruction to improve batching and worker continuity. As the submitted concurrency increases to 384 and 512 requests, however, NebulaSD’s request-round processing rate rises from 1178 to 1594 and 1875 rounds/s, while the fixed-affinity baselines remain close to their saturated rates. NebulaSD consequently exceeds Native Distributed by approximately 25% at 384 requests and 49% at 512 requests. The remaining panels in Fig. 11 explain this crossover from the execution behavior. As the shared request population grows, NebulaSD can select from a larger set of eligible requests and keep both stages more continuously supplied. Its time-weighted SM activity therefore increases with concur-rency, while the mean Target compute gap decreases from 25.9 ms at 256 requests to 11.7 and 5.9 ms at 384 and 512 requests, respectively; the Draft compute gap remains consistently small. These trends indicate that the larger request population provides more schedulable flexibility for batch reconstruction rather than merely increasing the amount of outstanding work. The results also characterize the operating regime targeted by NebulaSD. At relatively low concur-rency, fixed worker assignments can already remain sufficiently supplied, leaving limited additional benefit for global pooling. As concurrent demand grows, shared request pools expose more oppor-tunities to reduce worker idle intervals and utilize aggregate stage capacity. Importantly, the same scheduler configuration is used throughout the sweep, so the high-concurrency gains do not rely on workload-specific retuning. G.4 SENSITIVITY TO MODEL SCALE 

We further evaluate whether the benefit of NebulaSD depends on the Qwen3-0.6B draft model used in the main experiments. We replace it with Qwen3-1.7B while keeping the Qwen3-8B target model, 512 submitted requests, proposal depth of 4, 2D + 2T resource configuration, draft/target maximum batch sizes of 128/32, target service intervals of 160/130 ms, batch-formation slack of 30 ms, and maximum generation length of 128 tokens unchanged. Because changing the draft model can also change the number of useful tokens produced by each speculative round, we use request-round processing rate here to isolate the serving-side processing capacity. Table 5 shows that increasing the draft-model size slightly changes the absolute round-processing capacity but preserves the benefit of pooled execution. With Qwen3-1.7B, NebulaSD processes 1802 request rounds/s, compared with 1242 rounds/s for Native Distributed and 1130 rounds/s for Co-located execution, corresponding to 1.45 × and 1.59 × higher processing rates, respectively. These gains are close to the 1.48 × and 1.69 × advantages observed with Qwen3-0.6B, indicating that the benefit of many-for-many resource pooling is not specific to the 0.6B/8B model pair. The modest reduction in NebulaSD’s round-processing rate is primarily associated with a change in draft-stage service capacity. Replacing Qwen3-0.6B with Qwen3-1.7B increases the mean draft computation time from 89.70 to 93.01 ms and reduces the average Draft batch size from 89.84 to 87.83. In contrast, the target batch size remains 32 and its mean computation time changes only from 28.22 to 28.45 ms. The mean target compute gap consequently increases from 5.83 to 7.09 ms, consistent with the draft stage supplying verification work at a slightly lower rate. Despite this change in the balance between the two stages, NebulaSD continues to maintain a substantial processing-rate advantage over both fixed-affinity baselines. 

## H SIMULATION METHODOLOGY AND EXTENDED SCALING ANALYSIS 

Simulation methodology. We use a profiling-driven discrete-event simulator to study the compute-side behavior and scalability of NebulaSD beyond the physical deployment evaluated in 26 Preprint Section 6.1. Each request maintains independent draft and target states and progresses through the same alternating stage dependencies as in the real system. The simulator advances a virtual clock between execution and preparation events, applies all state transitions occurring at the same vir-tual time before scheduling, and separately maintains compute and P REPARE opportunities for each worker. Each P REPARE opportunity identifies its destination worker, and the simulator applies the worker-triggered batch-reconstruction abstraction described in Section 4 to select its next batch. An ideal migration estimator sets cross-device state-transfer latency to zero, allowing the simulation to isolate the compute-side behavior of the scheduling policy from practical data-movement and runtime overheads. The simulator does not reproduce the complete physical runtime. In the real implementation, scheduling decisions interact with HostKV publication, state observation, command dispatch, back-pressure, migration completion, and readiness retries. The simulator instead applies these state transitions directly in virtual time and assumes zero communication and control-plane latency. It consequently omits PCIe and network transfer time, H2D and D2H contention, inter-process com-munication (IPC) overhead, kernel-launch jitter, process interference, and physical GPU-memory fragmentation. The simulation should therefore be interpreted as an idealized evaluation of Nebu-laSD’s batching and scheduling behavior rather than a prediction of full-cluster wall-clock perfor-mance. 

Workload and execution model. All requests arrive at t = 0 in a post-prefill state with an initial anchor token. We set the speculation depth to d = 4 , so that each speculative round generates up to four proposal tokens in the draft stage and verifies the corresponding proposal in the target stage. This depth therefore determines the per-request computation workload of both stages in each round. For the scaling experiments, each request executes 32 speculative rounds. NebulaSD uses a maximum draft batch size of 512, while the maximum target batch size is 24 or 32 depending on the evaluated resource configuration. Compute latency and SM Active are obtained from offline profiling and interpolated across batch sizes under the same speculation depth. The same profiling model is used consistently across all simulated system scales. 

Metrics and Co-located baseline. We measure all configurations over the common interior virtual-time window [1 , 2.5] seconds and verify that no request completes within the measurement interval. Let the measurement duration be ∆, the total number of GPUs be G, and the number of submitted requests be R. For each compute batch j, let τj denote its overlap with the measurement window, sj its profiled SM Active, and bj its number of requests. The pool-wide time-weighted SM utilization is 

U =

P 

> j

τj sj

G∆ , (H.1) where idle GPU-time remains in the denominator. The mean request compute-service fraction is 

S =

P 

> j

τj bj

R∆ , (H.2) where queued requests also remain in the denominator. We additionally report request-round pro-cessing rate, defined as the number of request-level target verification rounds completed within the measurement window divided by ∆.The Co-located baseline uses the same total number of physical GPUs. Each GPU hosts one draft and one target instance and processes a fixed local request cohort through the two stages. A new FIFO cohort is admitted only after the current cohort completes its round, and requests remain assigned to the same GPU. The draft and target batch sizes are both 24 for the T24 configurations and both 32 for the T32 configurations. Consequently, once the number of active requests exceeds the requests that the fixed local cohorts can serve concurrently, only a subset of requests participates in each round while the remaining requests wait behind their assigned GPU. NebulaSD removes this local cohort constraint by reconstructing batches across the global draft and target pools, allowing the available service capacity to be shared across requests more flexibly. 

Extended scaling behavior. Fig. 12 shows that the utilization-service trade-off observed in the main evaluation persists over substantially larger worker pools. At low request concurrency, indi-vidual requests can receive nearly continuous compute service while a large fraction of the GPU 27 Preprint 1536 1792 2048 2304 2560 

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 2,048 requests

(a) 19 GPUs: 3D + 16T .3328 4352 4800 5632 6656  

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 4,800 requests

(b) 48 GPUs: 8D + 40T .6144 7168 8192 9216 10240  

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 8,192 requests

(c) 76 GPUs: 12D + 64T .6656 8704 9600 11264 13312 

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 9,600 requests

(d) 96 GPUs: 16D + 80T .12288 14336 16384 18432 20480  

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 16,384 requests

(e) 152 GPUs: 24D + 128T .13312 19200 22528 26624  

> Submitted requests
> 020 40 60 80 100
> SM-weighted utilization (%)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Compute-service fraction (%)
> NebulaSD Colocated
> Balanced load 19,200 requests

(f) 192 GPUs: 32D + 160T .

Figure 12: Extended simulation results across different system scales and draft-target provisioning ratios. Solid and dashed curves report pool-wide time-weighted SM utilization and mean request compute-service fraction, respectively. Vertical reference lines, where present, indicate the sampled load maximizing U × S and should be interpreted as a sampled utilization-service trade-off rather than a globally optimal concurrency level. pool remains idle. As concurrency increases, larger and more regular stage-specific batches raise hardware utilization without immediately reducing request service quality. Around the favorable sampled operating region, both metrics can remain high even at large scale, as summarized in Ta-ble 6. For example, the 152-GPU configuration reaches 86 .06% time-weighted SM activity and 

99 .61% mean request service at 16,384 requests while processing 139.3K request rounds/s. The 192-GPU configuration reaches 85 .85% time-weighted SM activity and 92 .76% request service at 19,200 requests while processing 158.7K rounds/s. For configurations that preserve the same draft-target provisioning ratio and proportionally scale the request population, the idealized homogeneous simulator reproduces the same normalized operating point, causing SM activity and request ser-vice to remain unchanged while aggregate round-processing capacity scales proportionally with the worker pool. These results extend the scaling trend reported in Section 6.2: enlarging the draft and target pools while preserving an appropriate capacity ratio increases aggregate processing capability without inherently forcing a proportional degradation in per-request service. Table 6: Representative sampled operating points for the extended scaling configurations. For each configuration, we report the evaluated request count maximizing U × S among the sampled loads. Rounds/s denotes request-level verification rounds per second. 

Configuration Requests SM util. Service Rounds/s 

19 GPU ( 3D + 16T ) 2,048 86 .06% 99 .61% 17,408 48 GPU ( 8D + 40T ) 4,800 85 .85% 92 .78% 39,680 76 GPU ( 12D + 64T ) 8,192 86 .06% 99 .61% 69,632 96 GPU ( 16D + 80T ) 9,600 85 .85% 92 .77% 79,360 152 GPU ( 24D + 128T ) 16,384 86 .06% 99 .61% 139,264 192 GPU ( 32D + 160T ) 19,200 85 .85% 92 .76% 158,720 

28 Preprint 

Interpretation and limitations. These simulations characterize the compute-side scalability and utilization-service trade-off of NebulaSD under idealized state movement, rather than the complete performance of a physical large-scale deployment. Communication contention, KV-migration over-head, control-plane cost, and workload variability are intentionally omitted, so the results should be interpreted as the scaling potential of the batch-reconstruction and scheduling policy. Together with the real-system evaluation in Section 6.1, the two sets of experiments provide complementary views, the physical deployment measures practical runtime performance, while the simulations isolate the behavior of dynamic pooling at larger scales. 29